---
title: Post #1
date: 2026-03-23
template: templates/post.html
---
Hello! I'm going to try writing about pretty much anything I'm interested in, hopefully this will be a variety of things, but who knows, its not like I've written it yet!

The aim of this is to document what I'm doing and thinking about, both for other people to read, and for my future self to better remember what I've done, as I change between different projects.

I think it would be good for myself to be able to see what I've done, see more about how I was viewing what I was working on, and how my opinions have changed over time.  Hopefully I also get better at writing by doing this.

I'm not really expecting to have many people, if any, read this site, but that doesn't really matter, I'm not exactly trying to earn any money from doing this, lets just see what happens.

I don't want to, and therefore won't write any part of this using AI or LLMs, the point of this is to express myself and I don't feel like that is something that I would be able to do if everything I say is filtered through a machine.  Apologies if any of the spelling or grammar isn't very good, it's entirely me messing it up!  (This doesn't even mention the ethical issues I have with the current AIs!)

As a little bit about myself, my name is Ella, I'm a Civil Engineer based in the UK and am working towards my chartership (hopefully).  For those of you in America, that's the equivalent to a PE license.  I additionally have interests in computer programming and computer architecture, but who really knows what I'm going to end up writing about here.
